Add run-time GC settings (#15844)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/run-time-config/garbage-collector.md

---
title: Garbage collector config settings
description: Learn about run-time settings for configuring how the garbage collector manages memory.
ms.date: 11/13/2019
ms.topic: reference
---
# Run-time configuration options for garbage collection

> This page contains information about garbage collector (GC) settings that can be changed at run time. If you're trying to achieve peak performance of a running app, consider using these settings. However, most users will not need to concern themselves with these settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This article contains information about garbage collector (GC) settings that can be changed at run time. If you're trying to achieve peak performance of a running app, consider using these settings. However, most developers don't need to worry about these settings.
```

Reviewer: any reason why they don't need to worry or concern with the settings that we can state?

> This page contains information about garbage collector (GC) settings that can be changed at run time. If you're trying to achieve peak performance of a running app, consider using these settings. However, the defaults provide optimum performance for most applications in typical situations.

Reviewer 2: around the beginning of the doc, we should say that the int values for the env vars are interpreted as hex and for other configs are interpreted as dec. the former often gets people.

Author: So for example, to specify a heap hard limit of 80K bytes, the values would be 80000 for the JSON file and 13880 for the environment variable? I assume the "0x" prefix should not be included.

> On this page, settings are arranged into groups of settings that you can use in conjunction with each other to achieve a specific result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On this page, settings are arranged into different groups that you can use in conjunction with each other to achieve a specific result.
```

Author: To me that makes it sound like the groups can be used in conjunction with each other. I'll try to think of different wording that doesn't duplicate settings.

> [!NOTE]
>
> - These settings can also be changed dynamically by the app as it's running, so any run-time settings you set may be overridden.
> - Some settings, such as [latency level](../../standard/garbage-collection/latency.md), are typically set only through the API at design time. Such settings are omitted from this page.

## Flavors of garbage collection

The two main flavors of garbage collection are workstation GC and server GC. For more information about differences between the two, see [Fundamentals of garbage collection](../../standard/garbage-collection/fundamentals.md#workstation-and-server-garbage-collection).

The subflavors of garbage collection are background and non-concurrent.

> Use the settings described in this section to select flavors of garbage collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the following settings to select flavors of garbage collection:
```

### System.GC.Server/COMPlus_gcServer

- Configures whether the application uses workstation garbage collection or server garbage collection.
- Default: Workstation garbage collection (`false`).
- For more information, see [Configure garbage collection](../../standard/garbage-collection/fundamentals.md#configuring-garbage-collection).

| | Setting name | Values | Version introduced |
| - | - | - | - |

> | **runtimeconfig.json** | `System.GC.Server` | `true` - server<br/>`false` - workstation | .NET Core 1.0 |

Reviewer: nit: I think it would be good if the entries would always follow the same order. e.g.

```suggestion
| **runtimeconfig.json** | `System.GC.Server` | `false` - workstation<br/>`true` - server| .NET Core 1.0 |
```

Author: I'm going with Bill's suggestion of always putting the default first.

| **Environment variable** | `COMPlus_gcServer` | 0 - workstation<br/>1 - server | .NET Core 1.0 |

> | **app.config for .NET Framework** | [GCServer](../../framework/configure-apps/file-schema/runtime/gcserver-element.md) | `true` - server<br/>`false` - workstation |  |

Reviewer: if this is a .NET Core article, why are we listing the Framework ones? Just so people can map what they used to use? Otherwise, if this article is applicable to both, should we move it to under the standard folder?

Author: This is a tough one. It was requested that I add the app.config setting, and I think it's a good idea even though the article is Core-focused. Perhaps I can add a note at the top that says .NET Framework settings are added for reference purposes? I don't think we should move this under the standard folder though. I do refer to this article from the standard/gc/fundamentals.md article for info about configuration, but I guess we assume most people are configuring for Core?

Reviewer: That's fine then if it's just for reference.

| | Setting name | Values | Version introduced |
| - | - | - | - |
| **runtimeconfig.json** | `System.GC.Concurrent` | `true` - background GC<br/>`false` - non-concurrent GC | .NET Core 1.0 |
| **Environment variable** | `COMPlus_gcConcurrent` | `true` - background GC<br/>`false` - non-concurrent GC | .NET Core 1.0 |
| **app.config for .NET Framework** | [gcConcurrent](../../framework/configure-apps/file-schema/runtime/gcconcurrent-element.md) | `true` - background GC<br/>`false` - non-concurrent GC |  |

## Manage resource usage

Use the settings described in this section to manage the garbage collector's memory and processor usage.

For more information about some of these settings, see the [Middle ground between workstation and server GC](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/middle-ground-between-server-and-workstation-gc/) blog entry.

### System.GC.HeapCount/COMPlus_GCHeapCount

- Limits the number of heaps created by the garbage collector.
- Applies to server garbage collection (GC) only.

> - If GC thread/processor affinity is enabled, which is the default, the heap count setting affinitizes *number* GC heaps/threads to the first *number* processors. (Use the affinitize mask or affinitize ranges settings to specify exactly which processors to affinitize.)

Reviewer 2: not sure what it means by "GC thread is enabled"?

| | Setting name | Values | Version introduced |
| - | - | - | - |
| **runtimeconfig.json** | `System.GC.HeapAffinitizeMask` | *decimal value* | .NET Core 3.0 |
| **Environment variable** | `COMPlus_GCHeapAffinitizeMask` | *decimal value* | .NET Core 3.0 |
| **app.config for .NET Framework** | [GCHeapAffinitizeMask](../../framework/configure-apps/file-schema/runtime/gcheapaffinitizemask-element.md) | *decimal value* | 4.6.2 |

### System.GC.GCHeapAffinitizeRanges/COMPlus_GCHeapAffinitizeRanges

- Specifies the list of processors to use for garbage collector threads.
- This setting is similar to `System.GC.HeapAffinitizeMask`, except it allows you to specify more than 64 processors.
- For Windows operating systems, prefix the processor number or range with the corresponding [CPU group](/windows/win32/procthread/processor-groups), for example, "0:1-10,0:12,1:50-52,1:70".
- If processor affinity is disabled by setting `System.GC.NoAffinitize` to `true`, this setting is ignored.
- Applies to server garbage collection (GC) only.

> - For more information, see [Maoni Stephens' blog entry](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/making-cpu-configuration-better-for-gc-on-machines-with-64-cpus/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For more information, see [Making CPU configuration better for GC on machines with > 64 CPUs](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/making-cpu-configuration-better-for-gc-on-machines-with-64-cpus/) on Maoni Stephens' blog.
```

| | Setting name | Values | Version introduced |
| - | - | - | - |

> | **runtimeconfig.json** | `System.GC.GCHeapAffinitizeRanges` | Comma-separated list of processor numbers or ranges of processor numbers.<br/>Unix example: "1-10,12,50-52,70"<br/>Windows example: "0:1-10,0:12,1:50-52,1:70" | .NET Core 1.0 |

Reviewer 2: this was actually introduced in core 3.0

| **Environment variable** | `COMPlus_GCHeapAffinitizeRanges` | Comma-separated list of processor numbers or ranges of processor numbers.<br/>Unix example: "1-10,12,50-52,70"<br/>Windows example: "0:1-10,0:12,1:50-52,1:70" | .NET Core 1.0 |
| **app.config for .NET Framework** | N/A | N/A | N/A |

### COMPlus_GCCpuGroup

> - Configures whether the garbage collector uses [CPU groups](/windows/win32/procthread/processor-groups) or not.

Reviewer 2: I forgot to mention this when we met, we might want to mention the related config for the threadpool so you can have thread pool threads be on all CPUs as well: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/framework/configure-apps/file-schema/runtime/thread-useallcpugroups-element. we also have the corresponding env var: set COMPlus_Thread_UseAllCpuGroups=1

  When a 64-bit Windows computer has multiple CPU groups, that is, there are more than 64 processors, enabling this element extends garbage collection across all CPU groups. The garbage collector uses all cores to create and balance heaps.

- Applies to server garbage collection (GC) on 64-bit Windows operation systems only.
- Default: Disabled (0).
- For more information, see [Maoni Stephens' blog entry](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/making-cpu-configuration-better-for-gc-on-machines-with-64-cpus/).

| | Setting name | Values | Version introduced |
| - | - | - | - |
| **runtimeconfig.json** | N/A | N/A | N/A |
| **Environment variable** | `COMPlus_GCCpuGroup` | 0 - disabled<br/>1 - enabled | .NET Core 1.0 |
| **app.config for .NET Framework** | [GCCpuGroup](../../framework/configure-apps/file-schema/runtime/gccpugroup-element.md) | `false` - disabled<br/>`true` - enabled |  |

### System.GC.NoAffinitize/COMPlus_GCNoAffinitize

> - Specifies whether to affinitize garbage collection threads with processors. That is, whether to create a dedicated heap, GC thread, and background GC thread (if background garbage collection is enabled) for each processor.

Reviewer 2: BGC threads are actually not affinitized.
for Server GC threads, we should just say that the GC thread is affinitized. "a dedicated heap" could be interpreted as heaps cannot point to each other but in fact they can. even if the GC threads are not affinitized, we still create a heap per GC thread. so perhaps something like -

"A heap is created for each GC thread; affinity means a GC thread can only run on its specific CPU"

- Applies to server garbage collection (GC) only.
- Default: Affinitize garbage collection threads with processors (`false`).

| | Setting name | Values | Version introduced |
| - | - | - | - |
| **runtimeconfig.json** | `System.GC.NoAffinitize` | `true` - don't affinitize<br/>`false` - affinitize | .NET Core 3.0 |
| **Environment variable** | `COMPlus_GCNoAffinitize` | 0 - affinitize<br/>1 - don't affinitize | .NET Core 3.0 |
| **app.config for .NET Framework** | [GCNoAffinitize](../../framework/configure-apps/file-schema/runtime/gcnoaffinitize-element.md) | `true` - don't affinitize<br/>`false` - affinitize | 4.6.2 |

### System.GC.HeapHardLimit/COMPlus_GCHeapHardLimit

- Specifies the maximum commit size for the GC heap.

> - The value can range from 0 to 18446744073709551615.

Reviewer 3: nit: add separators to really large numbers:

```suggestion
- The value can range from 0 to 18,446,744,073,709,551,615.
```

Author: Based on [this comment](https://github.com/dotnet/coreclr/pull/23251#issuecomment-477869150), should this be a hex value? @Maoni0

> - Specifies the maximum commit size, in bytes, for the GC heap.

Reviewer 2: for the GC heap and GC's own bookkeeping.

> - The value can range from 0 to 18,446,744,073,709,551,615.

Reviewer 2: in theory, yes it's a 64-bit number; in practice, of course you can only specify a value that you actually can commit.

| | Setting name | Values | Version introduced |
| - | - | - | - |
| **runtimeconfig.json** | `System.GC.HeapHardLimit` | *decimal value* | .NET Core 3.0 |

> | **Environment variable** | `COMPlus_GCHeapHardLimit` | *decimal value* | .NET Core 3.0 |

Reviewer 2: env vars are always hex value

### System.GC.HeapHardLimitPercent/COMPlus_GCHeapHardLimitPercent

- Specifies the GC heap usage as a percentage of the total memory.
- Example value: 25

| | Setting name | Values | Version introduced |
| - | - | - | - |
| **runtimeconfig.json** | `System.GC.HeapHardLimitPercent` | *percentage* | .NET Core 3.0 |
| **Environment variable** | `COMPlus_GCHeapHardLimitPercent` | *percentage* | .NET Core 3.0 |

### System.GC.RetainVM/COMPlus_GCRetainVM

- Configures whether segments that should be deleted are put on a standby list for future use or are released back to the operating system (OS).
- Default: Release segments back to the operating system (`false`).

| | Setting name | Values | Version introduced |
| - | - | - | - |

> | **runtimeconfig.json** | `System.GC.RetainVM` | `true` - put on standby<br/>`false` - release to OS | .NET Core 1.0 |

Reviewer 3: Should we always put the default first?

```suggestion
| **runtimeconfig.json** | `System.GC.RetainVM` | `false` - release to OS<br/>`true` - put on standby| .NET Core 1.0 |
```

Author: That sounds like a good idea.

| **Environment variable** | `COMPlus_GCRetainVM` | 0 - release to OS<br/>1 - put on standby | .NET Core 1.0 |

## Large pages

### COMPlus_GCLargePages

- Specifies whether large pages should be used when a heap hard limit is set.
- Default: Disabled (0).
- This is an experimental setting.

| | Setting name | Values | Version introduced |
| - | - | - | - |
| **runtimeconfig.json** | N/A | N/A | N/A |

> | **Environment variable** | `COMPlus_GCLargePages` | 0 - disabled<br/>1 - enabled | .NET Core 1.0 |

Reviewer 2: this became available in core 3.0

| **app.config for .NET Framework** | N/A | N/A | N/A |

## Large objects

### COMPlus_gcAllowVeryLargeObjects

- Configures garbage collector support on 64-bit platforms for arrays that are greater than 2 gigabytes (GB) in total size.
- Default: Enabled (1).
- This option may become obsolete in a future version of .NET.

> | | Setting name | Values | Version introduced |

Reviewer 2: this is also available on desktop: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/framework/configure-apps/file-schema/runtime/gcallowverylargeobjects-element

| - | - | - | - |
| **runtimeconfig.json** | N/A | N/A | N/A |

> | **Environment variable** | `COMPlus_gcAllowVeryLargeObjects` | 0 - disabled<br/>1 - enabled | .NET Core 1.0 |

Reviewer 3: same comment for putting the default first:

```suggestion
| **Environment variable** | `COMPlus_gcAllowVeryLargeObjects` | 1 - enabled<br/> 0 - disabled | .NET Core 1.0 |
```

## Large object heap threshold

### System.GC.LOHThreshold/COMPlus_GCLOHThreshold

- Specifies the threshold size, in bytes, that causes objects to go on the large object heap (LOH).

> | | Setting name | Values | Version introduced |

Reviewer 2: this is also available on desktop 4.8

Author: Okay, so should we add a page for it here? https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/framework/configure-apps/file-schema/runtime/runtime-element

Reviewer 2: yes, please.

| - | - | - | - |
| **runtimeconfig.json** | `System.GC.LOHThreshold` | *size in bytes* | .NET Core 1.0 |
| **Environment variable** | `COMPlus_GCLOHThreshold` | *size in bytes* | .NET Core 1.0 |

## Standalone GC

### COMPlus_GCName

- Specifies a path to the library containing the garbage collector that the runtime intends to load.
- For more information, see [Standalone GC loader design](https://github.com/dotnet/coreclr/blob/master/Documentation/design-docs/standalone-gc-loading.md).

| | Setting name | Values | Version introduced |
| - | - | - | - |

> | **runtimeconfig.json** | N/A | N/A | N/A |

Reviewer 2: this became available in core 2.0.
